# IST782
Portfolio of projects in ADS Courses

# Collect, store, and access data by identifying and leveraging applicable technologies
Data collection has been a large part of my data science background, as much of my research in the past has been comprised of data sets I have compiled myself through combining multiple public sources to create a group of data meant for my project. Projects in my Applied Data Science education that have helped build my skills in this field include my IST659: Data Admin Concepts and Database Management group project, where we used publicly available National Hockey League data and created our own database for ease of access among hockey statisticians. This built our skills with SQL and other database technology that will allow me to better understand how I can collect and store data for future projects, and in future work with companies.
	
# Create actionable insight across a range of contexts (e.g. societal, business, political), using data and the full data science life cycle
While much of my focus in data science has been in sport analytics, participating in the Applied Data Science graduate program has allowed me to apply the knowledge I’ve built into other areas of the professional world. In my Sport Analytics undergraduate education, I applied my data science skills to projects related to sport roster construction, business operations, and fan engagement, and in the iSchool, I have expanded to projects looking at other parts of the world, that I believe will end up helping me in the long run as I look to work in sport data analysis. Two of my most notable projects outside the focus of sports include my group work in IST687: Introduction to Data Science, where I participated in a study of electricity and energy usage, and my final exam in IST686: Quantitative Reasoning in Data Science, which involved working with a number of data sets related to disease and vaccination in school districts. While these projects were outside of fields I usually work in, they allowed me to understand how my data science education can apply to any field. By learning about efficiency and general data analysis in these other fields, I can apply what I’ve learned to any similar task I may find in the sport industry.

# Apply visualization and predictive models to help generate actionable insight
In terms of predictive models my group work in IST707: Applied Machine Learning focused on using my experience in data science to generate predictions for future events in the sport industry for stakeholders who benefit from early detection of trends. Specifically, my group focused on college basketball, a sport that has arguably the most intricate selection process for its postseason tournament. Stakeholders in a system of accurate predictions for tournament teams include betting companies, sports media, and businesses looking for teams and players to partner with. Our model was inspired by modern “bracketology” systems, and ended up generating a very accurate prediction of the 2024 NCAA Men’s Basketball tournament, which occurred alongside our timeline for this project.

# Use programming languages such as R and Python to support the generation of actionable insight
My knowledge of programming languages has improved significantly in the Applied Data Science program. Every facet of data analysis using these programming languages was explained at length over the course of my studies. Shiny apps were a huge focus of the group project in IST687, where we created an interactive app to measure energy efficiency. Regression analysis was explored in MAS766, where I was part of a group that modeled Major League Baseball attendance as a result of factors we scraped from publicly available sources. More complicated data analysis methods were a large part of the aforementioned IST707 project, as this research focused more on predictive analytics rather than descriptive.

# Communicate insights gained via visualization and analytics to a broad range of audiences (including project sponsors and technical team leads
My secondary core in Visual Analytics has allowed me to broaden my skills in presenting my data science work to others. With my planned involvement in the sport industry after graduation, I know that presenting data analysis to those without a data science background is critical for generating actionable insight within organizations. My final presentation in IST719: Information Visualization allowed me to take a subject I was very familiar with, my senior thesis research on momentum in hockey, and visualize the data I used in that project in a way that was easy to understand for someone without a hockey background. The main deliverable for this assignment was for me to explain the offensive environment of the NHL in a way that would allow me to go into more detailed hockey analytics projects in the future with someone new to the field.

# Apply ethics in the development, use and evaluation of data and predictive models (e.g., fairness, bias, transparency, privacy)
Throughout every project I have conducted in the Applied Data Science program there has been an ethical component, whether it be through analyzing potential bias or unfairness in an analysis or by ensuring certain private metrics are kept that way. For projects utilizing personal or sensitive data, such as the IST687 energy project or the IST686 disease study, it was important to anonymize the data on a personal level, and ensure that I was looking at the issue from a general perspective. In terms of fairness and bias, courses such as MAS766 reinforced the idea that multicollinearity and other overfitting issues must be dealt with before coming to a final conclusion.

